---
title: HIV and PrEP
permalink: /nsfw/hiv-and-prep/
description: "Why am I not on PrEP if I'm so paranoid about HIV that I won't even hook up with guys who are \"undetectable\"?"
tags:
  - nsfw
date: "2022-08-28"
last_modified_at: "2022-08-28T23:19:18+00:00"
---

## Paranoia

It's probably an exaggeration to say that I'm gripped by a paralyzing fear when confronted by the idea of HIV, but it's not that much of an exaggeration. It's not that I'm thrown into utter emotional dysregulation, but my fear of it is wildly disproportionate to the factual risks. In a lot of ways, it's exactly the same emotional experience as my fear about cancer and therefore almost all "radiation" sources. I'm acutely aware of mobile phones too close to my balls, driving past power plants, microwaves, wifi access points, cell phone towers, and x-ray machines. (I don't seem to be too worried about solar radiation, despite its obvious connection to skin cancer, maybe because I get "in my bones" how Vitamin D is protective against cancer...or maybe I just love the sun too much.) But in these cases, I've forced myself to overcome the discomfort and derive value out of mobile phones, continue driving along roads to my destinations, "nuke" my food for convenience, and get the medical diagnostics I need to get done. Because science. Maybe the desensitization over time has helped. But what's odd is that this fear of cancer long predates several family members' actually dying from cancer (in one case, horribly), and yet my worry about any particular carcinogenic source (imaginary or not) has decreased over time.

I have a qualitatively similar paranoia about other STDs, but the quantitative intensity is much lesser, presumably because (most) of them can be fully cured, and HIV cannot. Moreover, HIV requires ongoing treatment and dependence on drugs (which itself scares me). Yes, the drugs and their side-effects have improved over time (though I'm so, so cautious about what I put in my body in general), but what if, due to politico-economic circumstances, the drugs become unavailable? Frankly, given the disruption in numerous supply chains and access to medical care that happened in 2020-2022 due to the government's response to COVID-19, that doesn't seem too far-fetched, and that didn't even happen during a period of general economic crisis. I'm straying a bit here, but my point is to indicate that, while my fear of HIV might have a genesis in my general risk-aversion about STDs (which might itself be connected to a ton of dispositions I have about hygiene and cleanliness even more generally), HIV, like cancer, is different because its spectre looms for the rest of one's life in terms of monitoring and/or treatment.

With HIV, though, it's not as simple to overcome the fear reaction as it is with cancer. I won't have sex--any kind of sex--with someone who is HIV+, even if he's "undetectable".

This isn't a judgment of others (eg, for being "unclean" or for being "slutty"). And it's not a function of my being uneducated on the facts about the risks. This is just a pathological fear...and it's _pathological_ because it's utterly uncalibrated to the facts. It's not under my direct volitional control, and the only way I know to recalibrate my emotions (once I have the right intellectual content) is to push through the discomfort. (That's how I got over my shyness about [nudity](/nsfw/nudity/).) But more on that in a bit.

Because--understandably, but erroneously--I've been accused more than once of being "ignorant" or "uneducated" on the mere basis of my behavioral decisions, I want to make it clear that I _am_ clear on the science. Now, I'm not sure how much confidence I have in the substantive claims coming out of anything government-funded (let alone a government agency itself), but insofar as the CDC is to be trusted, according to [their current-as-of-2019 guidance](https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/risk/estimates/riskbehaviors.html){:target="&lowbar;blank"} (based on a 2014 meta-analysis), even the riskiest sex with an HIV+ person has only a 1.38% chance of HIV transmission. And for HIV+ guys who are on their antiretroviral therapy and therefore "undetectable"? The risk is 0%. (The interesting implication of the last fact is that it means that a guy who says he's HIV+ and "undetectable" is statistically less of a threat than a guy who says he's HIV-.) Trust in the CDC aside, this seems roughly consistent with my observations of transmission rates in the culture, when I'm reflecting on my experiences soberly. Intellectually, I understand the facts about the risks.

So I've been in situations where things have gotten hot and heavy with a guy before we've talked about STD status and recency of tests, but I always have the presence of mind to ask before actually engaging in any sexual activity. In one case that I remember pretty distinctly, the guy told me he was HIV+, but "undetectable". Let me tell ya-- However much people talk about "thinking with the _other_ head", my cock does _not_ have even a metaphorical brain; but it sure does respond very quickly to emotions like fear and not to the intellectual content of my (actual) brain. There was no way that I could get it up at that point.

Not being able to get it up is an unpleasant experience for a dude. And it's also not great for someone on the receiving end (or would-be receiving end--hah!). Getting over my fear by forcing myself to engage in the behavior is not a winning strategy in this situation: More than anything, it's really not fair to the other dude to use him for something like this and subject him to a high risk of "equipment malfunction" (which, by the way, has downstream effects on other sexual experiences), and also, I can't will myself to actually "complete" the behavior, since getting it up is not under my volitional control.

So, I'm open to ideas about how to deal with this, but for now, I don't know what else to do but just pass up opportunities for sexual relationships/engagements with HIV+ dudes. (For those of you who might offer me advice, please realize that avoiding knowledge of HIV positivity by not asking about it is also a failing strategy: Aside from the fact that it's generally foolish to avoid frank conversations about STDs, the moment it even occurs to me to ask, if I don't affirmatively learn the guy is HIV-, it's a boner-killer.

### Connection to COVID

This is definitely a bit of an aside, but I'll say that one benefit of wrestling with this issue is that it's allowed me to more easily and directly empathize with people whose overabundance of caution (ie, pathological fear) with respect to COVID leads them to take really absurd actions (eg, wearing masks outside in sunshine when there's a breeze) or avoiding activities altogether (eg, events where people might be unvaccinated, even if everybody has a negative test result within the relevantly recent timeframe). Some people really are confused about the science, and COVID has definitely been politicized, so I don't blame folks too much for not really knowing whom to trust with how much certainty. And lots of stuff about the details of COVID (and vaccines) can be complex and tricky; we can't all be specialists. But there's a ton of really uncalibrated behavior that cannot be attributed to confusion about the science; it's just that--for whatever reason--some people have a very strong fear response to COVID, and despite knowing, intellectually, what the risks might be, unless they take their precautions, they will just be suffering an ongoing fear or panic. This applies to some of the smartest (and even the most brilliant) people I know, too. I can understand why they'd rather avoid an event, for instance, than go, knowing they won't be able to enjoy it because they'll be ruminating about COVID the whole time in a state of near-panic.

Now, I think there's an argument here for people to consider some kind of desensitization strategy as I described for myself above with cancer or [nudity](/nsfw/nudity/), since with COVID, there isn't really an issue of "getting it up" like there is with HIV for me (unless we're talking about avoiding sex with people out of a COVID-based fear!), but really, I don't think I'm in a position to be offering any kind of generalized advice on this matter. [People need to figure things out on their own timelines, in their own ways](/prime-directive/), and people's individualized circumstances (including psychological contexts) are so varied and nuanced that I would need to practice the care of a psychotherapist with a person one on one before I was prepared to speculate with any certainty what kind of approach might help recalibrate their emotional response to COVID.

So while it's frustrating to watch friends make life-hindering decisions on the basis of uncalibrated fears about COVID (which superficially look like ignorance about the science), I totally get the emotional experience of it, and that alone improves my own experience of their decisions (to say nothing of my judgment of them as people).

## Pharmacological Risk-Aversion and Moral Hazards

I hope that the foregoing paints a clear enough picture of what's going on with me that it goes without requiring explicitly saying that my taking PrEP would not make any difference, since the issue is not the factual risk, even if it's 0%.

But why not reduce my risk further, since guys who say they are HIV- can still be positive, and PrEP would help in that regard?

The deepest reason is my aversion to unnecessary [pharmacological intervention](/pharmaceuticals/). I have enough GI issues that I do not need to risk PrEP adding another factor to the mix, to say nothing of [other side effects](https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/basics/prep/about-prep.html#:~:text=side%20effects%20like%20diarrhea%2C%20nausea%2C%20headache%2C%20fatigue%2C%20and%20stomach%20pain){:target="&lowbar;blank"}; it's hard enough establishing the relevant causation for myself about existing things I'm wrestling with. There's more to be said about that, but given my risk profile, the tradeoff is not worth it: As a reference point, I've had anal sex with four guys between 2018 and 2022 (to date at the time of this writing). My bar is pretty high for the connection I need before I even want to have sex with a dude, so by the point I'm there, I've gotten quite a bit more firsthand data that renders him quite a bit less risky than even that 1.38% statistic if he were positive and not on antiretroviral therapy.

So what do I mean by "moral hazards"? Well, you may be shocked to learn this, but there are more STDs than just HIV, some of which are rather unpleasant, even if ultimately curable. While I think that the existence of PrEP has been a net benefit (and an extreme one at that), one unintentional side-effect of it is that it has lulled many into a false sense of security, allowing for the greater transmission of these other STDs (if you believe that gays were previously regulating their sexual conduct via condoms or other mechanisms, which I suppose is a debatable point). Frankly, I'm not too worried about the moral hazard involved here as a cultural phenomenon, but it does mean that I have to at least be a little bit more vigilant now about these other STDs, and in any event, it goes back to my deeper point about my not being on PrEP: It won't protect me from these other STDs.

And that brings me to the next logical point regarding these other STDs...

## Condoms

I don't fuck without condoms unless I'm in a monogamous relationship. Surely, that should be uncontroversial at this point.

PrEP wouldn't protect me from other STDs I'd like to avoid, and with respect to those STDs, condoms give me sufficient peace of mind with guys who say they're negative for those STDs and for HIV. But, like PrEP, condoms are ineffective at alleviating my fear around HIV, so they do not enable me to fuck a dude I know to be HIV+.

That having been said, I fucking hate condoms, and they often interfere with the enjoyment of a sexual experience. Oh well.
